**Nejc:** *gojenje krompirja*
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
**1. Spatial Analysis for Crop Land Suitability Evaluation: A Case Study of Potatoes Cultivation in Wonosobo, Indonesia**

At present, the potatoes cultivation strategy is still based on farmers preferences. They plant on their land without seeing the crop land suitability. This causes a low productivity of 16.99 tons/ha and the production target is not achieved, only 85.93%. The objectives of this study was to provide recommendations for optimizing suitable crop land using spatial analysis with overlay techniques. The contribution of this study was the combination of 5 physical factors in spatial analysis with overlay techniques to evaluate the crop land suitability value. We refer to Regulation Agriculture Minister of Republic of Indonesia No. 07/Permentan/OT.140/2/2012 with development based on overlay maps land ability, land suitability, regional potential and land for sustainable food agriculture. To measure the location suitability, we used five physical controls in spatial analysis of crop land suitability, namely altitude, soil texture, slope percentage, rainfall and temperature. We obtained 16 grids on all crop land units and we determined the samples were 16 points in Wonosobo, Indonesia. We used intervals of 3.75 and 4 classes to analyzed crop land suitability. By using overlay techniques, the results showed that the average has suitability for the crop land in good condition, with a few inhibiting factors that is equal to 67.21% spread in samples 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, and 14. To support sustainable food agriculture, we recommend cropping focus in Kejajar (sample number 1) which has the most suitable land suitability value for potato cultivation in Wonosobo. For further research, this method can be used to calculate the Land Potential Index using spatial analysis and remote sensing.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
**2. Low Cost IoT Based Smart Irrigation System for Potato Cultivation**

In today's world Smart agriculture is playing vital role to enhance quality and quantity of food production with optimum utilization of farmers' time and efforts. Smart irrigation is an important component of it. Potato cultivation needs regular irrigation for maintaining the required soil moisture. Potato plants are normally grown in dry season. Therefore, scarcity of water for irrigation is observed in many potato fields. Here we have proposed a smart irrigation system for optimum usage of water during irrigation in potato fields. Prior to performing smart irrigation, various soil parameters were monitored, like soil type, humidity, and temperature of the atmosphere. To ensure the quality of water that is to be supplied to the potato plants, the water pH was also checked. Data from the sensors were transferred to the edge server using Low-Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN) technology and from the edge server to the cloud using the Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) protocol. Machine learning classification models and Deep belief neural network (DBNN) are employed to create intelligent irrigation systems, and a quick comparative analysis has been done with earlier studies. The results obtained helped us to conclude that our system achieved optimum use of water for irrigation.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
**3. On the Selection of Features for the Prediction Model of Cultivation of Sweet Potatoes at Early Growth Stage**

With the changes in the agricultural environment, the cultivation of sweet potatoes today cannot be managed extensively as in the early days. The increase in production costs makes it necessary for enterprises that manage agricultural lands to estimate the premium grade yield more accurately, reduce the risk and cost of supply shortages, and even further improve premium grade yield and maximize the value of agricultural properties. In the past, the forecast of premium grade yield used manual inspection and field sampling to judge the growth status of sweet potato and infer the final output of premium-grade sweet potatoes, but such an estimation method requires long-term tracking and could not do early supply planning. Therefore, this study aims to develop a prediction model for sweet potato production, using cultivation information provided by a sweet potato depot manufacturer in Taiwan, agro-meteorological information provided by an agricultural improvement farm in Taiwan, and the wholesale price of sweet potato provided by Taiwan Council of Agriculture. Combining the information from the planting day to 4 days after planting, we determine the features of the model that predicts excellent potato yield during the early planting stage of sweet potatoes. We investigate hierarchical feature clustering and simulated annealing feature selection, removing features that are unrelated to yield prediction, and redundant features that are highly correlated with other features. Our results show that the 3-day-after-planting information may provide predictable information in the feature selection stage, and the wholesale price of sweet potato was found to be related to the premium-grade yield in the experiment.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
**4. Revolutionizing Potato Farming: A CNN-Powered Approach for Early Blight and Late Blight Detection to Ensure Global Food Security**

Potato, a crucial global food crop, faces persistent threats from diseases like early blight and late blight, jeopardizing both yields and economic stability. In response, we present an innovative approach using CNN for early disease detection in potato crops. Our objective is to empower farmers with rapid and accurate disease identification, facilitating timely treatments to prevent economic losses and reduce agricultural waste. Our CNN model achieved a remarkable validation accuracy of 99.59%, outperforming conventional methods. With 183,747 trainable parameters, our efficient and accurate model is set to revolutionize agricultural practices. Furthermore, we are deploying our model to Google Cloud and developing a React Native mobile app for potato prediction. This integration aims to provide farmers with real-time disease insights, preventing economic losses and ensuring global food security, thereby enhancing economic stability in the potato farming sector.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
**5. Study of the effect of electromagnetic radiation of extremely high frequency wavelength on potato growth rate**

The experimental investigations of the impact of low-intensity electromagnetic fields of extremely high frequency on morphometric growth parameters of potato tubers seedlings, as well as growth parameters of plants and potato tubers are carried out in the “Scientific Research Institute of Applied Electrodynamics, Photonics and Living Systems ” (SRI AEPLS). This article presents the results of investigations, tubers processing methods and estimation of the used EMF parameters. Possible approaches are discussed to the mathematical modeling of treatment of dielectric materials, to which the potato sprouts and tubers should be attributed. The procedure of these investigations was as follows: specified groups of samples of potato tubers, before vemalization in light and subsequent germination or planting in the ground, were treated with EMF of EHF with a wavelength of 7.1 mm, low intensity - no more than 1mW/sm 2 . The duration of this treatment and, as a result, the EMF energy absorbed by tubers had different values for different groups of samples.


**____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________**

**KAZALO VIROV**


**1. Citat:** R. Yusianto, Marimin, Suprihatin and H. Hardjomidjojo, "Spatial Analysis for Crop Land Suitability Evaluation: A Case Study of Potatoes Cultivation in Wonosobo, Indonesia," 2020 International Seminar on Application for Technology of Information and Communication (iSemantic), Semarang, Indonesia, 2020, pp. 313-319, doi: 10.1109/iSemantic50169.2020.9234284.
keywords: {suitability land;potato cultivation;agriculture;spatial analysis},

**2. Citat:** S. Gour, R. K. Kasera, W. N. Singh and T. Acharjee, "Low Cost IoT Based Smart Irrigation System for Potato Cultivation," 2023 IEEE Guwahati Subsection Conference (GCON), Guwahati, India, 2023, pp. 01-06, doi: 10.1109/GCON58516.2023.10183589.
keywords: {Temperature sensors;Temperature measurement;Irrigation;Cloud computing;Soil moisture;Machine learning;Servers;Smart agriculture;Smart irrigation;potato cultivation;LPWAN;MQTT;DBNN},

**3. Citat:** L. Shu, B. Hsiao, Y. -H. Liou and Y. -L. Tsai, "On the Selection of Features for the Prediction Model of Cultivation of Sweet Potatoes at Early Growth Stage," 2019 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Xiamen, China, 2019, pp. 2981-2988, doi: 10.1109/SSCI44817.2019.9002871.
keywords: {Predictive models;Feature extraction;Data models;Simulated annealing;Production;Prediction algorithms;Urban areas;feature selection;feature grouping;simulated annealing;gradient boosting regression tree},

**4. Citat:** M. D. Sai Ponnuru and L. Amasala, "Revolutionizing Potato Farming: A CNN-Powered Approach for Early Blight and Late Blight Detection to Ensure Global Food Security," 2024 IEEE International Students' Conference on Electrical, Electronics and Computer Science (SCEECS), Bhopal, India, 2024, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/SCEECS61402.2024.10482138.
keywords: {Economics;Technological innovation;Food security;Crops;Predictive models;Stability analysis;Mobile applications;Potato disease detection;Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs);Early blight;Late blight;Agriculture;Crop protection Food security;Economic stability},

**5. Citat:** A. V. Stepura and P. I. Talanov, "Study of the effect of electromagnetic radiation of extremely high frequency wavelength on potato growth rate," 2015 International Conference on Antenna Theory and Techniques (ICATT), Kharkiv, Ukraine, 2015, pp. 1-3, doi: 10.1109/ICATT.2015.7136897.
keywords: {Agriculture;Productivity;Electromagnetic fields;Generators;Antenna theory;Microwave theory and techniques;Electromagnetic fields;extremely high frequencies;microwave technologies;quality of agricultural production;productivity;phytopathogens;diseases},


